



Okay, I want to recreate one of my favorite language families, IBM PL/S-III, PL/AS, and PL/X, but they are proprietary and confidential, it is very hard to find examples or documentation, so my recreation of this language would be a conceptual homage that in no way would be compatible.  But I would want the language I build to be practical (for me at least).  So what is is that I want:  A system development language like C, but with no runtime (free-standing).  Things like malloc are replaced with OS system services (Real Storage Manager GETMAIN).  I do not want C syntax, but something like PL/I (PL\I?).  Very important: metaprogramming: a compile time macro processor.  More like m4 than a C-preprocessor.  Here we can stray from the original.  I'm thinking of a macrolisp DSL that is tied into the AST for my PL/SW (Programming Language for Software Wrighter).  The other thing is that this is a transpiler, PL/SW to .s translator, not a compiler per-se. However it does have to target an ISA and worry about register usage.  PL/X had the ability to "drop into assembler" (like the asm! macro in Rust or (asm "label" "op r1,r2") in macrolisp.  BTW, Rust is the closest language I've found to PL/X (which used manual memory management, not a borrow checker).  I do not want to port Rust.  I want a PL/I-flavored C compiler (to .s not .o) with Macro pre-processor.  Makes sense?


Thought for 12s
Yes — it makes sense, and it is a very coherent language design target.

What you are describing is not “recreate PL/S-III exactly.” It is more like this:

Restated goal
Build a freestanding systems language that:

feels PL/I-ish, not C-ish

translates to assembler source (.s), not object code

has no mandatory runtime

expects OS services instead of libc/runtime facilities

allows controlled escape hatches into assembly

includes a real compile-time metaprogramming system

is practical for kernel / supervisor / low-level tools / bare-metal / OS-adjacent work

That is a legitimate design space, and historically it is close in spirit to what PL/S was for IBM: a machine-oriented, PL/I-flavored systems language with inline assembler and explicit low-level control. IBM’s internal PL/S family was used for systems programming, was based on PL/I, and supported inline assembly and explicit register control. PL/S evolved through PL/S II, PL/S III, PL/AS, and later PL/X. IBM kept the compiler proprietary for competitive reasons. 

High-level architecture
The cleanest architecture is:

PL/SW source
  -> lexer/parser
  -> AST
  -> macro expansion on AST (or syntax objects)
  -> semantic analysis / type checking
  -> low-level normalized IR
  -> instruction selection + register planning
  -> assembler-source emission (.s)
That is better than “just a text preprocessor + parser” because your macro system wants to be language-aware, not token-splicing in the C preprocessor sense.

So I would frame it this way:

Core idea
PL/SW is a source-to-source systems compiler:

source language: PL/I-inspired systems language

output language: target ISA assembler

no runtime unless the program explicitly links or includes one

macro system operates on syntax/AST, not raw text

That is a strong design.

Why this direction is good
Benefits
1. You avoid the C trap
You get low-level control without inheriting:

C declarator syntax

preprocessor weirdness

header-file culture

implicit runtime/library assumptions

“undefined behavior as optimization fuel” as the central language philosophy

2. Emitting .s is a feature, not a weakness
For your goals, assembler output gives:

inspectability

deterministic debugging

easy integration with existing assemblers/emulators

easier experimentation with multiple back ends

opportunity to hand-tune generated code when needed

This is especially attractive if your ecosystem already centers on:

your assembler

your emulator

your custom ISA(s)

bootstrap toolchains

3. AST macros can be far better than CPP
A Lisp-like compile-time DSL tied to the AST can let you express:

bitfield definitions

register save/restore patterns

syscall stubs

dispatch tables

storage layouts

inline code generators

declarative hardware register maps

That is exactly the kind of thing a systems language benefits from.

4. “Drop to asm” remains available
PL/S-like or Rust-like escape hatches are important in system software:

interrupt prolog/epilog

exact register choreography

MMIO sequences

special instructions

calling convention boundaries

ABI glue

This should exist, but be contained and typed where possible.

The main design question
The real question is not “does it make sense?”

It is:

What is the semantic center of gravity?
You have three plausible choices.

Option A: “PL/I-flavored structured assembler”
This is the simplest and probably best starting point.

Features:

blocks

declarations

procedures

conditionals

loops

typed scalars

pointers / addresses

structs

arrays

assembler escapes

explicit storage classes

optional explicit register hints

This is the most realistic v1.

Option B: “PL/I-ish systems language with C-like semantics”
This means:

predictable value semantics

pointers

structs/unions

manual memory management

no GC

no exceptions

no hidden runtime

ABI-oriented procedures

This is probably what you want operationally, even if the syntax is PL/I-like.

Option C: “Macro-heavy compiler-construction platform”
This leans harder into the compile-time DSL:

macros create declarations, statements, types

the language becomes partly a domain language workbench

much more power, but much more risk

This is a powerful long-term direction, but dangerous as a starting point.

Recommendation
Start with A + selected parts of B.

That gives you:

PL/I-flavored syntax

structured language

freestanding systems semantics

enough low-level control to be practical

a tractable compiler/transpiler

Nonfunctional requirements
For a project like this, I would explicitly optimize for:

1. Auditability
Generated .s should be readable and stable.

2. Bootstrap friendliness
Compiler written in Rust now, but language design should not assume Rust forever.

3. Freestanding operation
No required runtime, heap, or libc.

4. Retargetability
Even if backend 1 is COR24 or another ISA, don’t bake in one machine too early.

5. Predictability
No hidden allocations, hidden temporaries, or hidden control flow unless obvious.

6. Metaprogramming safety
Macros should be powerful, but they must not turn the language into undebuggable soup.

Suggested language shape
Syntax flavor
A PL/I-like surface syntax could look something like:

DCL COUNT FIXED BIN(24);
DCL PTR POINTER;
DCL BUF(256) CHAR;

PROC MAIN OPTIONS(FREESTANDING);
   DCL RC FIXED BIN(24);

   IF COUNT = 0 THEN DO;
      CALL INIT();
   END;

   DO WHILE COUNT > 0;
      CALL STEP(COUNT);
      COUNT = COUNT - 1;
   END;
END;
But I would not try to preserve historical PL/I complexity.
Instead, keep the flavor while simplifying aggressively.

Keep
DCL

PROC

DO ... END

IF ... THEN

named storage classes / attributes

readable declaration syntax

Drop or simplify
too many defaulting rules

overly rich PL/I string model at first

condition handling / ON-units initially

complicated decimal arithmetic

huge attribute combinatorics

Recommended semantic model
Memory model
For v1, make it brutally explicit:

scalar values

addresses / pointers

l-values vs r-values

static storage

automatic stack storage

based/pointed storage later

no implicit heap

A language like this should probably have explicit concepts like:

STATIC

AUTOMATIC

EXTERNAL

REGISTER hint

VOLATILE

ALIGNED

AT(address) or equivalent for MMIO

Procedures
Procedures should support:

explicit calling convention

explicit return type or RETURNS(...)

optional NORETURN

optional LEAF

optional ASM / NAKED

optional clobber declarations if needed

Types
Start small:

integer types by width/signedness

address/pointer

arrays

records/structures

bitfields later

enums later

unions maybe, but not immediately unless you need overlays

Given your interests, bitfields and overlays will matter, but do them only once the core is sound.

Macro architecture
This is the most important part of your idea.

What not to do
Do not start with a CPP-style preprocessor as your primary metaprogramming system.

That would undermine your best differentiator.

What to do instead
Use two layers:

Layer 1: minimal lexical facilities
Only:

file inclusion

conditional compilation by target/platform/feature

maybe simple string interpolation

Layer 2: AST-aware macros
This is the real system.

Macros should be able to produce:

declarations

statements

expressions

type fragments

assembler fragments

whole procedure skeletons

A Macro Lisp DSL tied to syntax objects is a good idea.

Best model
Think:

Lisp-ish macro language

input is syntax nodes, not text

output is validated syntax nodes

hygienic by default where practical

non-hygienic escape when explicitly requested

Not fully hygienic if that gets in your way, but at least scoped and structured.

Good use cases
Examples of things your macros should excel at:

MMIO register definitions
%REGDEF UART_STATUS AT 16rFF0101
   FIELD TX_READY BIT(0);
   FIELD RX_READY BIT(1);
END;
Save area prolog generation
%PROLOG USING(R1,R2,R3);
Supervisor-call wrappers
%SVC GETMAIN
   INPUT  LENGTH: U24;
   OUTPUT PTR: ADDRESS;
END;
Table-driven opcode families
%DEFINE_SHIFT_OPS(...);
This is where your language becomes genuinely valuable.

Inline assembly / assembler escape
You absolutely should include it.

But design it carefully.

Three levels of escape
1. Expression-level intrinsic
For single instructions or special ops.

X = ASM_EXPR("add %0,%1,%2", A, B);
2. Statement/block-level asm
For short sequences.

ASM DO;
   "push r1";
   "push r2";
   "mvi r1,42";
END;
3. Full naked procedure / external assembler linkage
For handlers, boot code, trampolines.

PROC TIMER_ISR OPTIONS(NAKED, ASM);
   ...
END;
Important constraint
Do not let inline asm become the hidden implementation language of everything.
That destroys the value of PL/SW.

Make it:

easy for genuine edge cases

slightly inconvenient for routine work

Backend design
Because you emit .s, you still need a real backend discipline.

Suggested backend layers
1. Typed AST
Language-level semantics.

2. Lowered IR
Desugar:

loops

procedure returns

aggregates

address calculations

short-circuit logic

3. Machine-aware IR
Represent:

virtual registers

stack slots

labels

calls

memory ops

explicit widths

4. Register planning / instruction selection
Since this is transpiling to assembly, this layer matters a lot.

You do not need an LLVM-scale backend.
But you do need a consistent policy for:

caller/callee saves

register pressure

spills

temporaries

condition codes / compare model

multiword values if any

Recommendation
Start with a naive but explicit register allocator:

linear-scan-ish

or even template-based allocation with spilling

prioritize debuggability over peak code quality

That will get you much farther than overengineering early.

Practical scope for v1
A good v1 language would support:

Core v1
integer scalars

pointers/addresses

arrays

records

procedures

local/static/external declarations

assignments

arithmetic and comparisons

IF, DO WHILE, counted loops

calls

labels and GOTO only if you really need them

inline asm

AST macros for declarations/statements

assembler emission

Defer
exceptions / condition handlers

decimal arithmetic

rich strings

separate compilation complexity beyond what you need

advanced optimization

full PL/I compatibility ideas

complicated macro reflection

Source organization model
A language like this also needs a sane module story.

I would recommend:

Compilation units
Each file becomes one translation unit.

Include/import
Have both:

textual include for declarations/macros

semantic import for modules/interfaces later

Interfaces
Eventually define something like:

public declarations

external procedure declarations

external storage declarations

named ABI blocks

Since you output .s, your symbol model should be explicit from day one.

Risks
1. Too much language, too early
PL/I family languages can become huge fast.

Mitigation: build a small “systems subset” and refuse feature creep early.

2. Macro system swallowing the language
Powerful macros can make everything inscrutable.

Mitigation: require macro expansions to be inspectable; support “show expanded source” views.

3. Backend complexity sneaks up
Even with .s output, codegen and registers are still hard.

Mitigation: pick one ABI and one ISA first; keep lowering simple.

4. Surface nostalgia can distort practicality
Trying to be too evocative of PL/S or PL/X may trap you in historical quirks.

Mitigation: take the spirit, not the fossil.

A good design philosophy
I would describe PL/SW like this:

A freestanding, PL/I-inspired systems language with explicit storage, predictable code generation, AST-based compile-time metaprogramming, and controlled inline assembly, transpiling to human-readable assembler.

That is clear, differentiated, and practical.

My recommendation for the first milestone
Build a tiny end-to-end slice:

Phase 1
Support only:

DCL

integer scalar types

pointer/address type

PROC

assignment

IF

DO WHILE

procedure call

RETURN

ASM DO ... END

one simple macro form

.s emission for one ISA

Test programs
Write:

hello/UART output stub

MMIO LED toggle

small counted loop

simple structure access

OS service wrapper like GETMAIN

interrupt stub with inline asm

If those feel good, the language is on the right track.

Bottom line
Yes, it makes sense.

More specifically:

Conceptually: very sound

Architecturally: clean and achievable

Practically: useful for your kind of work

Historically: aligned with the spirit of PL/S-family systems languages without trying to clone proprietary IBM internals

PL/S historically was exactly in the space of a PL/I-derived systems language with inline assembly and machine control, and IBM kept it proprietary while evolving it through PL/S II, PL/S III, PL/AS, and PL/X. 

The part where you deliberately diverge — the AST-aware Macro Lisp metaprogramming system — is not a weakness. It is probably the best reason to build PL/SW at all.

Suggested next artifact to define
The next useful thing to pin down is a one-page language charter with:

syntax principles

semantic principles

storage model

procedure/calling model

macro model

asm escape model

what is explicitly out of scope for v1

I can draft that charter next.


notes: you mentioned C defines (implying .h file discussiom).  My source file type will be .plsw and the .h (.mac) equivalent will be .msw  files.  DCL or DECLARE will support levels usually odd numbered to future-proof.  This allows for unions.  I didn't mention but this fits COR24 ISA because only CHARS and INTS (signed, different sizes). and bytes, words, bits. No floats.  Obviously arithmetic and logical shifts.  I have fuzzy memory about how to create macros.  they were .mac (like .h) IIRC in the JCL DD equivalent of an include path.  There may have been something like MACRODEF keyword.  To invoke (expand?) a macro (after including it) you would use something like ?GETMAIN(something) SUBPOOL(something) ADDRESS(pointer to set);  not sure how RC was handled (GETMAIN could fail).  Also there was a ?ESTAE macro to establish a recovery environment (think try/catch/finally).  and corresponding macros to un-establish the environment, free storage.  Other macros handled entry/exit linkage.  The PL/X macros could use GEN (GEND?) blocks to generate register operations directly.  The GETMAIN macro would generate an assembler SVC (software interrupt service call).  This whole model is what I want to recreate, explore, leverate.  Entire system components were written by one developer using macros that generated macros that generated macros (but you could read the assembler listing with interspersed PL/X code).  This is my focus--to recreate a system (not the exact syntax) that enables these abstractions and high-level code to generate low-level boile plate code.

Yes — this sharpens the target a lot.

What you want is not merely “a PL/I-flavored systems language.” You want a macro-centered systems construction environment where .plsw is the high-level language and .msw is the reusable metaprogramming/interface layer that expands into lower-level constructs, including direct assembler generation where needed.

That is a much more specific and much more interesting design.

Restated design target
PL/SW should be:

a freestanding systems language

with PL/I-like declaration structure

targeting assembler source

with no float requirement

and with a first-class macro facility that can:

abstract OS services

generate linkage boilerplate

generate recovery/environment scaffolding

generate inline or out-of-line assembler

generate other macros

and allow developers to build entire system subsystems from layered macro vocabularies

That last part is the real heart of the system.

The language is not the whole product
The real product is:

PL/SW language
+ MSW macro system
+ assembler generation facilities
+ listing / expansion visibility
+ conventions for system services and linkage
That matches your goal much better than “just transpile a PL/I-like syntax to .s.”

Your notes imply a two-layer architecture
Layer 1: the core language
The core .plsw language should stay relatively small:

declarations

procedures

statements

integer and character data

records / unions via levels

pointers / addresses

shifts, masks, bit operations

calls

control flow

limited inline asm escapes

This should be understandable without metaprogramming magic.

Layer 2: the macro/meta layer
The .msw layer should provide:

service invocation abstractions like ?GETMAIN(...)

environment/recovery constructs like ?ESTAE(...)

entry/exit/linkage macros

structured resource cleanup macros

assembler generation blocks

syntax sugar that expands to core .plsw or raw .s

macro libraries that can define domain-specific sublanguages

That is where the real power lives.

So I would explicitly make .msw a compiled macro/interface language, not “just include files.”

Your declaration model makes sense
Using DCL or DECLARE with levels is a very good fit.

Why it fits your goals
It gives you:

familiar PL/I-family flavor

structured layout specification

future-proof support for overlays / unions

a natural way to describe machine-oriented storage

a path to records that map closely to hardware / control blocks / save areas

For COR24, where your data model is intentionally narrow, this is especially attractive.

Suggested approach
Have declaration levels define storage trees.

Example shape:

DCL 1 SAVEAREA,
      3 BACKPTR   PTR,
      3 FORWPTR   PTR,
      3 REGS,
        5 R0      INT(24),
        5 R1      INT(24),
        5 R2      INT(24);
And for unions / overlays, you can later introduce something like:

DCL 1 TOKEN UNION,
      3 AS_INT    INT(24),
      3 AS_WORD   WORD,
      3 AS_CHARS  CHAR(3);
Or use level semantics plus an explicit attribute like UNION.

That is much more expressive for systems layout than C syntax.

COR24 constraints actually help
Your target constraints are a strength here.

Because COR24 is integer-centric, you can avoid a huge amount of compiler complexity.

Good v1 type universe
You probably only need:

BIT

BYTE

WORD

INT(n) or named integer widths

CHAR

PTR / ADDRESS

arrays

records

unions / overlays

And perhaps signed vs unsigned forms if needed.

You do not need to pretend this is a general-purpose scientific language.

That means your compiler can stay focused on:

layout

addressing

expression lowering

shifts/masks

procedure linkage

macro expansion

assembler generation

That is a very manageable and coherent scope.

The macro invocation model you describe is excellent
This kind of syntax:

?GETMAIN(LENGTH) SUBPOOL(SP) ADDRESS(PTR);
?ESTAE(EXITRTN) PARAM(DATA);
is exactly the kind of thing that makes the language feel system-native rather than library-ish.

It has several advantages.

Why this is better than C-style macros or plain function calls
1. It signals “compile-time construct”
The leading ? clearly says:

this is not a normal procedure call

this is a macro expansion / code-generation form

semantics may include generated declarations, labels, asm, error paths, save/restore, etc.

That is very valuable.

2. Keyworded arguments fit the domain
System macros often have many optional clauses:

address

length

subpool

RC target

cleanup action

condition branch

flags

Named clauses are much better than positional calls.

3. It supports machine-code generation patterns
A macro like ?GETMAIN is not a function. It may:

evaluate operands

reserve temporaries

emit one or more instructions

branch on condition

store results into variables

generate labels

optionally emit cleanup hooks

That is exactly what a macro facility should be allowed to do.

Strong recommendation: macros should be syntactic forms, not token tricks
Do not model .msw macros as text substitution.

Instead, model them as something like this:

Macro definition conceptually
A macro definition takes:

a name

a clause grammar

a semantic expander

optionally helper functions/macros

For example:

MACRODEF GETMAIN
   REQUIRED LENGTH(expr);
   OPTIONAL SUBPOOL(expr);
   OPTIONAL ADDRESS(lvalue);
   OPTIONAL RC(lvalue);
   OPTIONAL ONFAIL(label-or-block);
END;
Then the implementation expands into AST or low-level IR.

That gives you the power of the historical model without becoming opaque mush.

You want macros that generate macros that generate macros
That is the key statement in your note.

This means your macro system cannot be shallow.

You need staged metaprogramming.

Practical design
I would support three expansion categories:

1. Surface macros
Expand user syntax into core .plsw forms.

Example:

?DO_UNTIL(...)

?WITH_SAVEAREA(...)

2. Structural macros
Generate declarations, procedures, labels, linkage, and cleanup scaffolding.

Example:

?ENTRY

?EXIT

?SAVE_REGS

?RECOVERY_FRAME

3. Codegen macros
Emit low-level IR or raw assembler directly.

Example:

GEN DO ... END

?SVC(...)

?LOAD_REG(...)

This staged model lets you build big abstractions out of smaller ones.

GEN blocks are worth making first-class
Your mention of GEN/GEND-style blocks is important.

I would absolutely include this, but with structure.

Suggested model
A macro may contain a GEN region that emits machine operations in a structured way.

For example:

MACRODEF GETMAIN
   ...
   GEN DO;
      LOAD R1, LENGTH;
      SVC 10;
      STORE R1, ADDRESS;
      STORE RC_REG, RC;
   END;
END;
But internally, I would not treat this as plain strings if you can avoid it.

Instead, treat GEN as a mini machine DSL:

register references

instruction mnemonics

labels

relocations

symbolic operands

target-aware checking

That gives you a path to correctness and retargetability.

Listing and transparency are essential
This is probably the most important tooling requirement.

Because you want high-level code generating low-level boilerplate, the user must be able to inspect:

original .plsw

included .msw

macro-expanded .plsw

generated GEN / low-level forms

final emitted .s

And ideally a mixed listing like:

source line
expanded macro explanation
generated assembler
Why this matters
Without this, the language will become untrustworthy.

With this, you get the historical superpower:
developers can write in abstractions but still read the assembler listing and understand what happened.

That is exactly the mode you said you care about.

So this should be a first-order design requirement, not a nice-to-have.

Recovery/environment macros are a major opportunity
The ?ESTAE-style idea is especially interesting.

You do not need to recreate historical semantics exactly.
You need your own model for:

establish recovery environment

unwind / cleanup / release storage

branch to handler

restore prior environment

That suggests PL/SW should eventually have a structured abstraction for:

resource scopes

cleanup scopes

recovery regions

“finally”-like generated cleanup

Two possible directions
Direction A: macro-only
All recovery semantics are built with macros that expand to explicit low-level code.

Pros:

simple core language

maximum transparency

historically faithful in spirit

Cons:

may become verbose

harder to analyze semantically

Direction B: core support plus macro sugar
Introduce a small core notion of protected region / cleanup region, then let macros build on it.

Pros:

easier correctness guarantees

easier tooling

Cons:

larger core language

My recommendation
For v1, use macro-only.
Later, if patterns stabilize, promote common behavior into core constructs.

Entry/exit/linkage macros should probably be central
Because this is systems code, procedure prolog/epilog and conventions matter a lot.

So instead of treating procedure entry as just syntax, I would expect heavy macro involvement.

For example:

PROC MYROUTINE OPTIONS(SYSTEM);
   ?ENTRY SAVE(R1,R2) BASED(BR12) WORKAREA(MYWS);
   ...
   ?EXIT RC(0);
END;
These macros can generate:

save-area management

base register setup

stack frame or static work area conventions

return code setup

cleanup ordering

debugging hooks

This is exactly the kind of abstraction that makes low-level code practical at scale.

Source path / include path model
Your note about .msw files being found on an include-like search path is good.

I would define this explicitly.

Suggested source model
.plsw
Primary source files containing procedures, declarations, and macro invocations.

.msw
Macro/interface files containing:

macro definitions

shared declarations

constants

service signatures

storage/control-block templates

conditional target definitions

Search path
A configurable ordered list of macro libraries, similar in spirit to include/DD allocation search.

That gives you:

system macro libraries

target-specific macro libraries

project-local macro libraries

experimental macro packages

Very natural for this kind of environment.

One subtle but important distinction
You should decide whether a macro expands to:

Option 1: AST only
Everything expands into normal .plsw syntax trees, and only later gets lowered.

Pros:

simpler conceptual model

more uniform tooling

Cons:

harder to express some direct machine choreography

Option 2: AST plus low-level emission forms
Macros may generate either:

high-level PL/SW syntax

or low-level codegen nodes / GEN blocks

Pros:

more expressive

closer to what you want historically

Cons:

compiler becomes more complex

Recommendation
Use Option 2, but carefully.

Have a rule like:

normal macros should prefer expanding to AST

GEN regions are the sanctioned escape hatch for emitting machine-level operations

That keeps things powerful without making everything machine soup.

Suggested first-class macro categories
I think your system should intentionally support these categories:

1. Service macros
Examples:

?GETMAIN

?FREEMAIN

?ATTACH

?WAIT

?POST

2. Recovery macros
Examples:

?ESTAE

?UNESTAE

?CLEANUP_SCOPE

3. Linkage macros
Examples:

?ENTRY

?EXIT

?SAVE

?RESTORE

4. Data-layout macros
Examples:

register save areas

control blocks

DSECT-like structures

MMIO register blocks

5. Code-generation macros
Examples:

shifts / bitfield packing

dispatch table generation

instruction-family generation

loop skeletons

inline machine sequences

6. Meta-macros
Macros that define or parameterize other macros.

That taxonomy will help keep the ecosystem coherent.

A likely good compiler pipeline now
With your clarified goals, I would refine the architecture like this:

.plsw + .msw
  -> parse source and macro definitions
  -> build syntax objects / AST
  -> resolve macro libraries via search path
  -> macro expansion (possibly staged)
  -> expanded AST + GEN nodes
  -> semantic analysis / type & storage checks
  -> lowering to machine-aware IR
  -> emit .s
  -> emit mixed listing
The crucial addition is:

macro libraries are parsed as real language artifacts

expansion is staged

mixed listing is a first-class output

What to keep out of v1
To protect the project, I would keep these out initially:

floating point

decimal arithmetic

full exception semantics

generalized hygienic macro theory

many target ISAs at once

sophisticated optimization

separate compilation complexity beyond symbol import/export

too many type categories

You want the first version to prove the macro abstraction model, not solve every language problem.

What v1 should prove
A successful v1 should demonstrate these end-to-end cases:

Example 1: service invocation
?GETMAIN(LENGTH(256), SUBPOOL(0), ADDRESS(BUF), RC(RC));
expands to correct setup + SVC + result capture.

Example 2: entry/exit linkage
A procedure with ?ENTRY and ?EXIT emits correct save/restore and return sequence.

Example 3: recovery environment
A protected block establishes and removes a recovery frame.

Example 4: data-layout macro
A macro generates a control block declaration with correct offsets.

Example 5: meta-macro
A macro library defines a family of related service macros from a smaller schema.

If those work, you have the core of the language system.

Bottom line
Your clarification changes the center of gravity from:

“PL/I-like systems language that transpiles to .s”

to:

“Macro-driven systems construction environment with a PL/I-like core language and a first-class macro/meta layer for generating structured low-level code.”

That is stronger.

It also suggests a good slogan for the project:

PL/SW is not just a language
It is a systems macro language with a structured systems language embedded inside it.

Or, phrased the other way:

It is a small systems language designed to be amplified by macro libraries.

That feels much closer to what you actually want.

My strongest recommendation
When you write the design doc, put these three principles at the top:

1. Macro expansion must be inspectable
Always be able to see what code was generated.

2. Core language stays small
Power lives in macro libraries, not in endless core-language features.

3. Low-level generation is a feature, not a leak
The system is explicitly designed to let high-level abstractions generate machine-oriented boilerplate.

The next best step is to define:

the .msw macro definition syntax,

the macro invocation grammar,

and one concrete worked example for ?GETMAIN, ?ENTRY, and ?ESTAE.

I can draft that mini-spec next.




